Implementation of Internet of Things (IoT) can be utilized to decrease the loss of time experienced by a motorcycle owner when their motorcycle got stolen. This research aims to design and develop a system that can detect early symptomps of motorcycle theft and instantly sends a notification to the user’s cellphone when it is detected. The symptomps of motorcycle theft that was mentioned translates to three simple parameters which inputs are taken from three different sensors, the parameters being detected movement in front of the motorcycle keyhole, detected pressure on the motorcycle seat, and whether or not the motorcycle moved from a still condition. The system is also designed to display the motorcycle’s security status and its last location on a simple Android application. The motorcylce’s security statuses are processed by an Arduino and are sent through GSM module to a cloud storage, which are then sent to the Android application in the user’s cellphone. Results of system functionality tests in this research are yet to be in accordance with the design as the there were problems in processing the data which resulted in failure of sending the data.

Skema deteksi dini gejala pencurian sepeda motor dimulai dengan pengambilan data menggunakan sensor infrared, sensor tekanan, dan akselerometer. Data-data tersebut selanjutnya diolah oleh Arduino untuk menentukan apakah motor sedang mengalami gejala pencurian motor. Apabila sistem mendeteksi positif terjadi gejala pencurian motor, yakni, salah satu dari sensor mengirimkan sinyal positif, maka Arduino akan mengirimkan notifikasi berupa SMS ke Android pengguna menggunakan modul GSM. Alarm pada sistem yang diletakkan di bagasi motor akan menyala, kemudian pengguna dapat melihat status keamanan motor yang dikirimkan ke aplikasi Android pengguna melalui IoT. Setelah itu pengguna dapat memutuskan apabila ia ingin mematikan alarm dan mengetahui posisi motor. Posisi motor dapat diketahui dengan meminta data modul GPS yang tersimpan di cloud melalui aplikasi.

MIT App Inventor digunakan sebagai sarana untuk membuat aplikasi Android yang telah disebutkan.
